An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Income, Poverty and Health Insurance
Join us Tuesday, Sept. 15 at 10 am ET for a live webinar announcing new Income, Poverty and Health Insurance estimates for the nation.
Skip Header
Partners
Researchers
Educators
Survey Respondents
News
NAICS Codes
Jobs
About Us
Contact Us
Help
Topics
Data & Maps
Surveys & Programs
Resource Library
Search data, events, resources, and more
AI Use at U.S. Businesses
//
Census.gov /
Library /
America Counts: Stories /
AI Use at U.S. Businesses
Large Firms With at Least 20 Employees Biggest AI Users
May 26, 2026
Written by:
Adam Grundy, Cory Breaux and Dhanapati Khatiwoda

Use of artificial intelligence (AI) by U.S. businesses has grown since December but varied by firm size and sector, according to the U.S. Census Bureau’s Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS). 

The survey provides a biweekly, nationally representative view of AI implementation across the business landscape.

We reviewed the most recent six months of BTOS data collected from December 14, 2025 to May 3, 2026 to analyze trends in AI business usage.

The BTOS data (December 2025 to May 2026) show that overall AI usage hovered between 17% and 20% — and that between 20% and 23% of businesses expected to be using it in the next six months.

The BTOS captures two facets of AI adoption, asking the following questions (among others):

Whether the business used AI in the past two weeks.
Whether the business expects to use AI in the next six months.

Originally framed around AI use “in producing goods or services,” rather than to carry out simple tasks like drafting emails, the Census Bureau revised the wording last November to ask businesses whether they were using AI “in any business function.”

U.S. Business AI Use

The BTOS data (December 2025 to May 2026) show that overall AI usage hovered between 17% and 20% — and that between 20% and 23% of businesses expected to be using it in the next six months (Figure 1). 

AI use by firm size shows similar trends (Figure 2).

For example, 37% of firms with at least 250 employees reported using AI in their business operations. In the data collection period ending May 3, 2026, 32% of firms with 100 to 249 employees said they used AI.

Between December 2025 and May 2026, AI use increased among firms with at least 20 employees but didn’t change significantly among firms with fewer than 20 employees. Less than 20% of firms with four or fewer employees reported using AI.

AI Trends Across Sectors

AI use remained relatively steady in many sectors over the last six months (Figure 3). The rate of expected use within these sectors also did not undergo any statistically significant changes:

As of May 3, 2026, the AI use rates in the Information (39.7%) and Finance and Insurance (33.9%) sectors were both higher than the national rate (19.8%) but neither reported significant shifts since December.
The expected usage rates in both sectors tells a similar story. About 42% of businesses in the Information sector and roughly 39% in Finance and Insurance expected to use AI in their business functions over the next six months, higher than the national average but not significantly different from the expected usage rate reported six months earlier.
In comparison, businesses in the Retail Trade sector reported current and expected usage lower than the national average: around 14% of businesses currently use AI, and about 17% expect to in the next six months.
Future Improvements to BTOS

The BTOS continues to evolve as new tools like AI emerge.

On November 17, 2025, BTOS began collecting data for its second AI supplement and revised the core AI use questions. This updated supplement expands on the original content by measuring AI use across 15 different business functions, including finance, human resources, customer service, marketing, information technology and research and development.

In addition, the supplement asks about AI-related operational changes, such as training, workflow adjustments and new technology investments.

The supplemental data also ask why a business is not using AI. Data for this experimental product can be found on this page and in this recently published working paper. 

Adam Grundy is a supervisory statistician at the Census Bureau.

Cory Breaux is a survey statistician at the Census Bureau.

Dhanapati "Dhan" Khatiwoda is a mathematical statistician at the Census Bureau.

This article was filed under:

Business and Economy
Related Statistics
Business Trends and Outlook Survey (BTOS)
Provides insights with timely, high frequency data across all nonfarm sectors of the economy.
Subscribe

Our email newsletter is sent out on the day we publish a story. Get an alert directly in your inbox to read, share and blog about our newest stories.

SIGN UP TODAY

Contact our Public Information Office for media inquiries or interviews.

Share

Facebook
X (Twitter)
LinkedIn
Related America Counts Stories
Business and Economy
How AI and Other Technology Impacted Businesses and Workers
September 17, 2025
Businesses report that, in most cases, adoption of new technologies like robotics and Artificial Intelligence had no impact on worker numbers or skill level.
Employment
Unexpected Workforce Trends in Post-Pandemic Manhattan
February 19, 2026
Recent jobs data show Manhattan’s workforce shares have shifted younger, more female and into the Accommodation and Food Services industries after the pandemic.
Employment
Data Centers Growing Fast and Reshaping Local Economies
January 06, 2025
Employment in data centers increased nationally in 2023 but over 40% was concentrated in five states.
More Stories
America Counts: Stories
Taxation
How States Get Their Cut of the Cannabis Industry
September 10, 2026
Census Bureau cannabis excise tax data show how expanding markets and shifting tax structures influence state revenue trends.
Age
World Is Aging Faster Than the United States
September 03, 2026
Despite slower growth of its older population than other countries, the United States still faces challenges among older adults, like chronic illness.
Business and Economy
New Ways to Access One-of-a-Kind Data
August 06, 2026
The Annual Integrated Economic Survey expands how users can access economic data by industry and geography.
Population
Measuring Foreign-Born Population Over Nation’s 250-Year History
July 21, 2026
Historical census data document changes in the foreign-born population in both numbers and countries of origin. 
Page Last Revised - May 22, 2026

Some content on this site is available in several different electronic formats. Some of the files may require a plug-in or additional software to view.

The content on this page includes a link to a non-government website. Our linking to these sites does not constitute an endorsement of any products, services or the information found on them. Once you link to another site you are subject to the policies of the new site.

✕
Is this page helpful?

 Yes  No
Back to Header

Receive Updates

To sign up for updates please enter your email address.

Enter your email address
SUBSCRIBE

Stay Current

America Counts

Director’s Blog

Deputy Director’s Blog

Random Samplings

Research Matters

Stay Connected

Contact

Support

Jobs

Follow

Information Quality
|
Data Linkage Infrastructure
|
Data Protection and Privacy Policy
|
Accessibility
|
FOIA
|
Inspector General
|
No FEAR Act
|
U.S. Department of Commerce
|
USA.gov

Measuring America's People and Economy