An official website of the United States government

Here’s how you know
Income, Poverty and Health Insurance
Join us Tuesday, Sept. 15 at 10 am ET for a live webinar announcing new Income, Poverty and Health Insurance estimates for the nation.
Skip Header
Partners
Researchers
Educators
Survey Respondents
News
NAICS Codes
Jobs
About Us
Contact Us
Help
Topics
Data & Maps
Surveys & Programs
Resource Library
Search data, events, resources, and more
New Ways to Access One-of-a-Kind Data
//
Census.gov /
Library /
America Counts: Stories /
New Ways to Access One-of-a-Kind Data
The Annual Integrated Economic Survey (AIES) Offers a Streamlined Approach to Business Statistics and Visualizations
August 06, 2026
Written by:
Ruby-Jean Davis, Jordan Lloyd and Krysten Mesner

It doesn’t matter whether you’re a policymaker, a business leader or just trying to stay informed — our nation’s economy is complex.

Tracking online trends, judging local market conditions and gauging the economic health of an industry are easier with the right tools.

And now, you can access business revenue, payroll and employment data from the Annual Integrated Economic Survey (AIES) in one interactive visualization tool for the first time.

By bringing these data together in one place, the AIES enables data users to examine the economy with a depth of detail previously unavailable.


The AIES is the U.S. Census Bureau’s most comprehensive source of annual national and subnational economic data.

Combining seven previously administered business surveys and adding new levels of geographic detail, “the AIES provides insights that will inform decisions across the public and private sectors,” says Lisa Donaldson, assistant director for economic programs at the Census Bureau.

What Is the AIES?

The AIES gives a yearly snapshot of businesses by collecting information measures of their economic activity such as revenue, expenses and other industry-specific operations.

By bringing these data together in one place, the AIES enables data users to examine the economy with a depth of detail previously unavailable.

The AIES offers several key advantages over the surveys it replaced:

It reduces burden, improves operational efficiency and enhances data quality.
It provides annual data spanning 19 sectors in a single, unified location. Previously, users had to compile information from multiple sources to get a comprehensive view of the employer economy.
It offers data at the regional, divisional and state levels for select sectors.

For example, data users interested in finding statistics for the Food Manufacturing subsector can now compare summary statistics at various geographies (Table 1).

A New Visualization Tool

The AIES interactive visualization enables users to explore select North American Industry Classification System (NAICS) sector and subsector statistics by region (Figure 1).

Take the Food Manufacturing subsector again as an example. Users can view revenue and other summary statistic estimates across all regions of the country.

Data Access

Visit the AIES data page to explore the full range of AIES data. All available data are organized into multiple hyperlinked tables that make it easy to find needed information across a broad set of economic statistics. The available data and access methods include:

AIES Data Types

Summary Statistics (Sales, Value of Shipments or Revenue, Annual Payroll, First-Quarter Payroll, Employment, Production Workers, Inventories, Expenses).
Detailed Industry Expenses.
Inventory Valuation Statistics.
Detailed Revenue Products by Industry Statistics.
Statistics by Customer Type.
E-Commerce Statistics.
Experimental Data Releases.

AIES Data Access

data.census.gov.
File Transfer Protocol (FTP) Files.
Application Programming Interface (API).
Other Data Visualizations

In addition to the interactive visualization, new static data visualizations are also available for the 2023 AIES data.

Economic Snapshots by Industry and Geography showcase national, regional and division-level data for select sectors in the United States (Figure 2) and give users a glimpse of the kind of data available in an easy-to-consume format.

More information on the AIES is available on the AIES webpage and in our webinar, the February 2026 press release and a Random Samplings blog post.

Keep a lookout for 2024 AIES summary statistics (data collected in 2025) set to be released in September.

Ruby-Jean Davis is a survey statistician at the Census Bureau.

Jordan Lloyd is a survey statistician at the Census Bureau.

Krysten Mesner is a survey statistician and methodologist at the Census Bureau.

This article was filed under:

Business and Economy
Related Statistics
About the AIES
Provides detailed information on this company-based survey that covers domestic, nonfarm employer businesses with operations during the survey year.
Subscribe

Our email newsletter is sent out on the day we publish a story. Get an alert directly in your inbox to read, share and blog about our newest stories.

SIGN UP TODAY

Contact our Public Information Office for media inquiries or interviews.

Share

Facebook
X (Twitter)
LinkedIn
Related America Counts Stories
Business and Economy
Economic Census Geographic Area Statistics Data Now Available
April 07, 2025
A new data visualization based on the 2022 Economic Census shows the changing business landscape of 19 economic sectors across the United States.
Business and Economy
Big Improvements to the Annual Integrated Economic Survey (AIES)
March 26, 2025
The Census Bureau is making several changes and enhancements to capture 2024 economic data based on feedback from last year’s survey.
Business and Economy
Exploring Two “First Look” Economic Datasets
June 06, 2024
Early data from the 2022 Economic Census and 2023 Annual Business Survey offer a glimpse of the number of employer businesses in the United States.
More Stories
America Counts: Stories
Taxation
How States Get Their Cut of the Cannabis Industry
September 10, 2026
Census Bureau cannabis excise tax data show how expanding markets and shifting tax structures influence state revenue trends.
Age
World Is Aging Faster Than the United States
September 03, 2026
Despite slower growth of its older population than other countries, the United States still faces challenges among older adults, like chronic illness.
Business and Economy
New Ways to Access One-of-a-Kind Data
August 06, 2026
The Annual Integrated Economic Survey expands how users can access economic data by industry and geography.
Population
Measuring Foreign-Born Population Over Nation’s 250-Year History
July 21, 2026
Historical census data document changes in the foreign-born population in both numbers and countries of origin. 
Page Last Revised - August 3, 2026

Some content on this site is available in several different electronic formats. Some of the files may require a plug-in or additional software to view.

✕
Is this page helpful?

 Yes  No
Back to Header

Receive Updates

To sign up for updates please enter your email address.

Enter your email address
SUBSCRIBE

Stay Current

America Counts

Director’s Blog

Deputy Director’s Blog

Random Samplings

Research Matters

Stay Connected

Contact

Support

Jobs

Follow

Information Quality
|
Data Linkage Infrastructure
|
Data Protection and Privacy Policy
|
Accessibility
|
FOIA
|
Inspector General
|
No FEAR Act
|
U.S. Department of Commerce
|
USA.gov

Measuring America's People and Economy