<<<P1>>>
Deloitte’s State of Generative AI in the Enterprise 
Quarter four report
January 2025
Now decides next:  
Generating a new future
deloitte.com/us/state-of-generative-ai

<<<P2>>>
2
Introduction
Key findings
Looking back at 2024
Now: Where we are
Next: Looking ahead
Considerations
Case studies
Authorship & Acknowledgments
About the Deloitte AI Institute   
About the Deloitte Center for Integrated Research 
About the Deloitte Center for Technology, Media & Telecommunications
Methodology
Table of contents

<<<P3>>>
Introduction
Foreword
It was only about 10 years ago when visionary tech leaders started talking about 
a future powered by ubiquitous computing and ambient intelligence. Back then it 
sounded like science fiction. Today, it’s real. No where is this future more evident than 
in the rapid advancement and adoption of AI technologies. New models and tools are 
gaining greater and greater capabilities and performing more complex reasoning. Even 
what was state of the art a few years ago pales in comparison to what we have today. 
In this AI era, many now believe that Moore’s Law is effectively dead. And we have 
every reason to believe that the AI flywheel will continue to accelerate with every week 
and year—often referenced as the greatest secular shift of this quarter century. 
Despite the technology’s rapid pace, I hear from clients and business leaders who are 
wondering when it will meet their transformational expectations—when will business 
leaders see the value and innovation that has been promised?  
Just like the internet, cloud, or even mobile, the transformational opportunities weren’t 
uncovered overnight. But as they became pervasive, they drove significant disruption 
to business and technology capabilities, and also triggered many new business 
models, new products and services, new partnerships, and new ways of working and 
countless other innovations that led to the next wave across industries. As we have 
experienced the half-life of these waves continues to be shorter. As such, it requires 
enterprises to be a lot more structurally agile to adapt, embrace and innovate to stay 
relevant and differentiated. 
In the following report, we see that most companies are transforming at the speed 
of organizational change, not at the speed of technology. This is not surprising but is 
something that will need to be addressed. That said, many are also already using 
GenAI to create business value that exceeds their expectations—with compelling new 
use cases emerging every day. 
So, what do I say to clients who are in the trenches of this transformation? Don’t lose 
focus. Stay curious, and challenge the orthodoxies of your organizations. GenAI and 
AI broadly is our reality—it’s not going away. While there are more questions than 
answers, but to stay in the game, leaders must be willing to try, do unconventional 
things, learn and help mature.
State of GenAI in the Enterprise is a snapshot in time of this great transformation. An 
opportunity for you to see where and how organizations across industries are finding 
their way. I hope it serves to spark new ideas and new approaches that help illuminate 
the path to your organization’s AI-fueled future.    
–Ranjit Bawa, Principal, US Chief Strategy and Technology Officer
3

<<<P4>>>
Introduction
Generating a new future
For the past year, Deloitte has been conducting quarterly global survey reports and 
executive interviews focused on Generative AI (GenAI) in the enterprise. We titled 
our study Now decides next because we believed in GenAI’s potential to dramatically 
transform how businesses operate—and that the actions companies take today will 
have a decisive impact on their ability to succeed with GenAI in the future. And that’s 
exactly what we found. 
As with previous transformational technologies, the initial excitement and hype about 
GenAI has gradually given way to a mindset of positive pragmatism. Many companies 
are already seeing encouraging returns on their early GenAI investments. However, 
those companies and others have learned that creating value with GenAI—and 
deploying it at scale—is hard work. Although the technology at times seems like magic, 
there is no magic wand when it comes to GenAI adoption, deployment, integration  
and value creation.
4

<<<P5>>>
There is a speed limit. 
GenAI technology continues to advance at incredible 
speed. However, most organizations are moving at the 
speed of organizations, not at the speed of technology.  
No matter how quickly the technology advances—or 
how hard the companies producing GenAI technology 
push—organizational change in an enterprise can only 
happen so fast. 
Barriers are evolving. 
Significant barriers to scaling and value creation are still 
widespread across key areas. And, over the past year 
regulatory uncertainty and risk management have risen in 
organizations’ lists of concerns to address. Also, levels of trust 
in GenAI are still moderate for the majority of organizations. 
Even so, with increased customization and accuracy of 
models—combined with a focus on better governance—
adoption of GenAI is becoming more established. 
Some uses are outpacing others.  
Application of GenAI is further along in some business 
areas than in others in terms of integration, return on 
investment (ROI) and expectations. The IT function is 
most mature; cybersecurity, operations, marketing and 
customer service are also showing strong adoption and 
results. Organizations reporting higher ROI for their 
most scaled initiatives are broadly further along in their 
GenAI journeys. 
Introduction
Key findings
All statistics noted in this report and its graphics are derived from Deloitte’s fourth quarterly survey, conducted July – September 2024; The 
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise: Now decides next, a report series. N (Total leader survey responses) = 2,773. Percentages in this report 
and its charts may not add up to 100, due to rounding. 
Generative AI is an evolving area of artificial intelligence and refers to AI that in response to a query—a prompt—can create new text, 
images, video and other assets. Generative AI systems can interact with humans and are built—or “trained”—on datasets that range in 
size and quality from small language models (SLMs) to large language models (LLMs). Generative AI is also referred to as “GenAI.” 
Evolving upon GenAI technologies, emerging AI agents are software systems that can complete complex tasks and meet objectives with little 
or no human intervention. They are called “agents” because they have the agency to act independently, planning and executing actions to 
achieve a specified goal. Related, the vision for agentic AI is that autonomous AI agents will be able to execute assigned tasks consistently and 
reliably by acquiring and processing multimodal data, using various tools to complete tasks, and coordinating with other AI agents—all while 
remembering what they’ve done in the past and learning from their experience.
5

<<<P6>>>
The focus is on core business value. 
A strategic shift is emerging, from technology catch-up 
to competitive differentiation with GenAI. Beyond the 
IT function, organizations tend to focus their deepest 
GenAI deployments on parts of the business uniquely 
critical to success in their industries.  
The C-suite sees things differently. 
Relative to leaders outside of the C-suite, CxOs tend 
to express a rosier view of their organization’s GenAI 
investments—and how easily and quickly GenAI’s 
barriers will be addressed and value achieved. It’s critical 
that CxOs move on from being cheerleaders to being 
champions for achieving organizational efficiency and 
market competitiveness.
Agentic AI is here.   
Agentic AI is gaining interest as a breakthrough 
innovation that could unlock the full potential of GenAI, 
with GenAI-powered systems having the “agency” 
to orchestrate complex workflows, coordinate tasks 
with other agents, and execute tasks without human 
involvement. However, agentic AI is not a silver bullet and 
all the broad challenges currently facing GenAI still apply.
Introduction
Key findings
6

<<<P7>>>
Our previous quarterly report said the clock was ticking 
to prove value—and this remains true today. Senior 
decision-makers might not be demanding tangible value 
and financial results from GenAI yet, but they soon will be. 
More and more organizations are moving from GenAI 
experimentation to deployment and scaling—with 
proven use cases emerging and significant ROI being 
achieved through the most advanced GenAI initiatives. 
What’s more, despite some feelings of disillusionment 
and unmet expectations, the vast majority of 
organizations we surveyed are taking a realistic 
perspective and showing sustained commitment in their 
quest for value from GenAI, and they seem willing to 
do the hard work that needs to be done. Foundation 
model improvements—including domain and industry 
customization—and the promise of AI agents could 
help overcome inherent challenges and accelerate 
the creation of business value. However, it might be a 
multiyear journey for some organizations to reach full-scale 
deployment and achieve the ROI they are looking for.
With GenAI, some level of uncertainty is unavoidable 
and the technology will likely continue to advance at 
a  rapid pace. Business and technology leaders, for 
their part, should focus on what they can control—
namely, organizational readiness, particularly in areas 
such as data, risk management, governance, regulatory 
compliance and workforce / talent. Addressing issues 
in these key areas will help position organizations for 
success with GenAI no matter how the future unfolds. 
Introduction
Key findings
About the State of Generative 
AI in the Enterprise:  
Wave four survey results
The wave four survey covered in this report was fielded 
to 2,773 director- to C-suite-level respondents across six 
industries and 14 countries between July and September 
2024. Industries included: consumer; energy, resources and 
industrials; financial services; life sciences and health care; 
technology, media and telecom; and government and public 
services. The survey data was augmented by additional 
insights from 15 interviews with C-suite executives and AI and 
data science leaders at large organizations across a range of 
industries. For details on methodology, please see p. 45.
This quarterly report is part of an ongoing series by the 
Deloitte AI InstituteTM to help leaders in business, technology 
and the public sector track the rapid pace of Generative AI 
change and adoption. The series is based on Deloitte’s  
State of AI in the Enterprise reports, which have been  
released annually the past five years. Learn more at  
deloitte.com/us/state-of-generative-ai.
7

<<<P8>>>
The case studies featured in this report are a small subset of the insights from our ongoing 
in-depth interviews with business and AI leaders from a wide range of industries. The goal is 
to build on the quantitative findings from our quarterly surveys by capturing practical, real-
world insights directly from leaders and organizations on the front lines of GenAI adoption.
Our interviews explore how leading organizations in diverse industries are  
using GenAI to create value. Most notably, we are seeing initiatives focused  
on applying GenAI to business-specific challenges in areas critical to success  
in that organization’s industry. Examples include using GenAI for:
•   Brand promotion and integrated business planning in the consumer products industry
•   Predictive maintenance for physical assets in the energy industry
•   Drug discovery and clinical trial tracking in the pharmaceutical industry
•   Cybersecurity and portfolio management in the financial services industry
•   Sales enablement, chip development and improved search in the technology industry
•   Archive management and music source separation in the media and entertainment industry
This focus on mission-critical activities suggests a broad strategic shift in the GenAI 
landscape, from technology catch-up to competitive differentiation.
Real-world case studies
Go to case studies
8

<<<P9>>>
 
Looking back at 2024
9

<<<P10>>>
Our first global quarterly survey, conducted in late 2023, revealed great excitement and expectations for GenAI. 
However, those feelings were tempered by uncertainty and fear about the technology’s potentially negative impacts 
on workers and society. Our second and third quarterly surveys focused more deeply on how organizations were 
prioritizing tangible results and value creation from their GenAI investments, and on understanding and tackling 
the barriers to successful scaling. 
A key finding during the year was that promising results from early GenAI pilots were raising expectations and 
driving increased investment in the technology.
Today, interest and excitement about GenAI remain high. However, the initial fervor has gradually given way to a 
positive yet pragmatic mindset—especially among business leaders at all levels. Meanwhile, technology leaders’ 
interest and excitement have remained high and steady (figure 1).
Although this shift among business leaders might seem like a step backward for GenAI, it is entirely consistent with 
the usual life cycle for transformative technologies. It is also a net positive in terms of helping organizations move 
past the hype stage so they can directly tackle the serious work of using GenAI to create real business value.
Looking back at 2024
Now: Looking back at 2024
Figure 1
Q: For the following groups in your organization, rate their 
overall level of interest in Generative AI.
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise Survey,  
Q1 (Oct./Dec. 2023) N (Total) = 2,774; Q4 (July/Sept. 2024)  
N (Total) = 2,773; 14 countries common to both data sets
Level of interest in GenAI
(high + very high)
Q1
Q4
Board
C-suite /  
executive 
leaders
Technical 
leaders
LOB / 
functional 
leaders
Employees
62%
74%
86%
64%
49%
46%
59%
86%
56%
50%
A key finding during the year was that promising results 
from early GenAI pilots were raising expectations and 
driving increased investment in the technology.
-16 pts
-15 pts
10
10

<<<P11>>>
Over the past year, as organizations gained experience with GenAI, they began to better 
understand both the rewards and challenges of deploying the technology at scale—
and adjusted their plans and expectations accordingly. Budgets have risen, and the 
need for C-suites and boards to spur their organizations into action has diminished. 
At the same time, the need for disciplined action has grown. Technical preparedness 
has improved, while regulatory uncertainty and risk management have become bigger 
barriers to progress. Talent and workforce issues remain important; however, access to 
specialized technical talent no longer seems to be the dire emergency it once was, at least 
in comparison to other priorities. There has been one constant, however: improved data 
management continues to be a top priority, even for companies that live and breathe data.
“Data emerged as the central factor for [our GenAI] success,” said a former software 
engineering manager for one of the world’s leading technology companies. “While 
the models and computing power existed, accessing the right data proved to be the 
biggest bottleneck. To address this, the company implemented a centralized data 
strategy, managed by a single data leader, to streamline data acquisition and minimize 
redundancy—enabling faster model development.”
Now: Looking back at 2024
“Data emerged as the central  
factor for [our GenAI] success …”
— Former software engineering manager for leading technology company
11

<<<P12>>>
From a technology perspective, the capabilities of 
foundation models and applications have improved 
dramatically over the past year. There are smaller, more 
efficient models; better latency; bigger access windows; 
expanded modalities; greater autonomy; and increased 
model specialization. 
Reliability and trust have improved as well, although both 
still have a long way to go. Meanwhile, the adoption rate 
for customized, open-source and/or proprietary large 
language models (LLMs) remains limited at 20%–25% of 
those surveyed. 
Over the past year, respondents reported they 
believe their organizations have most improved their 
GenAI preparedness in the critical areas of technology 
infrastructure (+7 points) and strategy (+5 points). However, 
preparedness has seemingly not improved in the other 
critical areas of risk and governance and talent. 
The vast majority of respondents (78%) reported they 
expect to increase their overall AI spending in the next 
fiscal year, with GenAI mostly expanding its share of 
the overall AI budget relative to our first-quarter survey 
results. In particular, the percentage of organizations 
investing 20%–39% of their overall AI budget on 
GenAI climbed by 12 points, while the percentage of 
organizations investing less than 20% of their AI budget 
on GenAI fell by 6 points.
“The way we do business has not changed,” said the VP of 
artificial intelligence at a major media and entertainment 
company. “For every project, our objective is always to do 
something that has a positive impact on the business. This 
has not changed and is not going to change because it’s 
what makes sense. However, a large proportion of project 
proposals now have a [GenAI] component to them.”
Now: Looking back at 2024
78%
of respondents expect to increase their overall AI spending  
in the next fiscal year.
12

<<<P13>>>
Relative to other respondents, the C-suite leaders (CxOs) in our survey generally demonstrated higher levels 
of excitement and optimism about their organizations’ GenAI implementations. For example, 21% of C-suite 
survey respondents reported they feel GenAI is already transforming their organization, compared to only 8% 
of non-C-suite respondents. C-suite executives surveyed are comparatively less worried about barriers such 
as trust, risk management, governance and regulatory compliance. They also have a rosier view of how quickly 
their organization is moving, and how quickly the barriers to scaling and value creation will be addressed. 
Sixty percent of non-C-suite respondents believe it will take 12 months or more to overcome scaling barriers, 
compared to only 47% of C-suite respondents.
This doesn’t necessarily mean CxOs are out of touch with the challenges of adopting and deploying GenAI. 
It could be they are still playing the primary role of catalyst or cheerleader and are in the process of learning 
what it really takes to implement and scale GenAI. What will be important going forward is for CxOs to direct 
that enthusiasm to removing barriers and enabling scaling.  
Now that GenAI in the enterprise is moving past its infancy, CxOs should take on new roles, including those 
of guide, counselor and challenger. Chief executive officers should show top-down support for GenAI, be the 
champions for governance and risk initiatives, and foster an environment of trust and transparency. Chief 
information officers, chief technology officers and chief data officers should sharpen their focus on identifying and 
overcoming the barriers to large-scale GenAI deployment within their domains. Chief financial officers should 
ensure responsible spending without stifling innovation. And chief human resource officers should promote 
training, reskilling and other human capital investments. 
View from the C-suite
Now: Looking back at 2024
13

<<<P14>>>
The uneven pace of change
With transformational technologies, 
there are always gaps between the pace 
of technological change and the ability of 
individuals, businesses and policymakers 
to keep up. GenAI is no exception.
Incredible advances in GenAI technology, fueled by 
massive capital and intellectual investments from 
tech companies, are already manifesting in individuals’ 
everyday lives—through smarter smartphones, 
improved customer service, AI-enhanced search 
engines, and more. 
For businesses, embracing and integrating GenAI 
is much harder—and takes much longer—due to a 
complex mix of factors. This could include dealing with 
competing transformational priorities. However, policy, 
legislative and regulatory changes might be more 
challenging overall. 
Governments today face the monumental task 
of regulating a technology whose capabilities are 
still taking shape. One direct consequence is that 
regulatory compliance has emerged from the pack 
to become the top barrier holding organizations 
back from developing and deploying GenAI tools and 
applications (figure 2). This highlights respondents’ 
unease about which use cases will be acceptable, 
and to what extent their organizations will be held 
accountable for GenAI-related problems.
This uneven pace of change creates friction for 
organizations, which likely contributes to the relatively 
moderate pace of transformation we are seeing as 
businesses work through their challenges on the path 
to creating sustained value with GenAI. 
Now: Looking back at 2024
Barriers to developing and deploying GenAI
Q: What, if anything, has most held your organization back in developing and deploying Generative AI tools / applications? (Select up to three challenges)
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise Survey, Q1 (Oct./Dec. 2023) N (Total) = 2,774; Q4 (July/Sept. 2024) N (Total) = 2,773; 14 countries common to both data sets
Figure 2
Worries about 
complying with 
regulations
Difficulty 
managing risks
Lack of an 
adoption 
strategy
Difficulty 
identifying use 
cases
Trouble choosing 
the right 
technologies
Implementation 
challenges
Lack of technical 
talent and skills
Lack of a 
governance 
model
Cultural 
resistance from 
employees
28%
Not having the 
right comp. 
infrastructure / 
data
Lack of executive 
commitment 
and/or funding
38%
26%
32%
26%
27%
36%
26%
27%
24%
18%
22%
25%
21%
20%
17%
17%
17%
15%
15%
19%
14%
Q1
Q4
+10 pts.
+6 pts.
-10 pts.
14

<<<P15>>>
 
Now: Where we are
15
15

<<<P16>>>
For our fourth wave report, we wanted to answer  
several questions about scaling and value realization.
	
Where do things stand with workforce adoption? 
	
How many experiments are organizations pursuing, and what are  
their success rates? 
	
Which benefits are GenAI initiatives targeting? 
	
Are some types of GenAI initiatives / use cases showing more promise  
than others?
	
Are they meeting ROI expectations? 
Now: Where we are
1
2
3
4
5
16

<<<P17>>>
Where do things stand with workforce adoption?
Now: Where we are
1
Our latest survey results show that access to GenAI is still largely limited to less than 
40% of the workforce. Also, for most organizations, fewer than 60% of workers who 
have access to GenAI actually use it on a daily basis. This suggests many companies 
have yet to integrate GenAI into their standard business workflows. It also raises the 
chicken-and-egg question of whether limited access to GenAI is inhibiting comfort and 
uptake with the technology (and stifling innovation), or whether the lack of high-value, 
innovative use cases is limiting interest and adoption. 
For GenAI to become truly transformational, it will likely require greater numbers of 
workers experimenting and leveraging the technology to identify new, high-impact use 
cases within the business. “Within our organization, the demand for GenAI use cases 
and innovation primarily comes from middle management and employees, rather than 
being driven by the C-suite,” said the director of product management for GenAI, cloud 
and data centers at a leading semiconductor company. “While the C-suite has been 
slower to engage in AI implementation, teams across the company are developing 
proofs-of-concept and driving AI adoption through internal boards and governance 
structures. This bottom-up approach emphasizes improving workflows and test cases, 
with leadership providing support as needed for broader integration.”
Of course, access alone does not equate success. Providing access to GenAI does 
not mean workers will use it. Conversely, workers with a burning desire to use GenAI 
will likely find a way to do so, with or without approval. However, in order to foster 
transformation and maintain some level of control over how GenAI is used within the 
enterprise, it generally makes sense to offer broad workforce access to sanctioned 
GenAI tools, supported by clear guidelines for proper use. 
“Currently, GenAI adoption is driven by internal demand, with early adopters seeking 
to use the tools to meet their specific needs,” said the head of GenAI in product 
management at a major technology company. “However, we expect a shift towards 
push-driven adoption in the next year, where all business units will be required to 
integrate the platform as it becomes an approved and proven tool. This shift will create 
pressure for teams to leverage the technology or risk missing out on the benefits it offers.”
“Currently, GenAI adoption is driven 
by internal demand, with early 
adopters seeking to use the tools to 
meet their specific needs …”
— Head of Generative AI, project management at major technology company
17

<<<P18>>>
We found organizations are still heavily experimenting 
with GenAI, and scaling tends to be a longer-term goal. 
Over two-thirds of respondents said that 30% or fewer 
of their current experiments will be fully scaled in the 
next three to six months. This suggests companies are 
taking time to test GenAI’s capabilities and to figure 
out where it can help the most (figure 3).
The lion’s share of organizations are currently 
pursuing 20 or fewer GenAI experiments or proofs of 
concept (POCs) and expect to fully scale 10%–30% of 
those experiments in the next three to six months. 
As expected, individual company actions vary, with 
larger numbers of experiments being conducted by 
organizations that are large, advanced in their use of 
AI, and/or operating in key industries of technology, 
media and telecommunications; life sciences and 
health care; or financial services.
What is the state of  
GenAI experimentation?
Q: Approximately how many Generative AI experiments or proofs of concept is your organization currently pursuing? What percentage of these AI 
experiments or proofs of concept do you anticipate will be fully scaled in the next three to six months?
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise Survey, (July/Sept. 2024) N (Total) = 2,773
Figure 3
Now: Where we are
2
Volume of experiments / POCs
3%
More than 100
51 to 100
21 to 50
11 to 20
Less than 10
Don’t know
7%
35%
24%
29%
3%
Volume of experiments / POCs
% of organizations
Scaling progress (next 3-6 months)
2%
80%
2%
9%  
5%
13%
26%
% of experiments / POCs
27%
16%
1%
% of organizations
70%
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
0%
18

<<<P19>>>
“Improved efficiency and productivity” continue to be 
the most commonly sought benefits from GenAI, and 
many organizations (40%) reported they are already 
achieving their expected benefits in this area to a large 
or very large extent. However, our respondents cited 
slightly higher levels of success in a small handful of 
more strategic benefit areas, particularly “new ideas 
and insights” (46%) and “innovation and growth”  
(45%) (figure 4).
Which benefits are GenAI 
initiatives targeting?
Now: Where we are
60%
50%
40%
30%
20%
10%
10%    15%    20%    25%    30%    35%    40%    45%    50%    55%    60%
Benefits achieved 
 
(among companies that sought it, the % that  
achieved it to a large or very large extent)
Benefit sought
(% hoping to achieve the benefit)
Q: What are the key benefits you hope to achieve through your Generative AI efforts? (Select up to three benefits) To what extent are you achieving 
those benefits to date?  
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise Survey, (July/Sept. 2024) N (Total) = 2,773
Figure 4
Benefits achieved vs. benefits sought
Detect fraud and manage risk
achieving
seeking
Increase speed / ease of developing new systems
Enhance relationships with clients / customers
Uncover new ideas and insights
Encourage innovation and growth
Improve 
efficiency and 
productivity
Improve existing products and services
Shift workers from lower- to higher-value tasks
Increase revenue
Reduce costs
3
46%
of respondents (seeking the benefit) 
reported that they are uncovering  
new ideas and insights with GenAI.
19

<<<P20>>>
To understand where GenAI is having the deepest impact on organizations, we asked respondents to consider one 
of their most advanced GenAI initiatives—an initiative that is most fully scaled—and then to identify which function or 
department it targets.
Since GenAI is a highly advanced technology—and one of its best capabilities is generating 
computer code—it’s no surprise that the IT function came out on top (28%). 
However, the survey data also shows GenAI being deployed deeply in many other parts of the business as well, including 
operations (11%), marketing (10%), and customer service (8%) (figure 5a).
Figure 5a
Q: Consider one of your organization’s most advanced (scaled) 
GenAI initiatives. In which function or department is this initiative?
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise Survey, (July/Sept. 2024)  
N (Total) = 2,773
GenAI initiatives are most 
advanced within these functions
  28%
IT
Operations
Marketing
Customer service
Cybersecurity
Product development
Are some use cases showing more promise?
Now: Where we are
R&D
Sales
Strategy
Supply chain
Finance
HR
Manufacturing
Legal, risk, compliance
  11%
  8%
  10%
  8%
  6%
  7%
  5%
  4%
  5%
  4%
  2%
  2%
  1%
4
20

<<<P21>>>
Even more revealing, we found that the 
most advanced GenAI applications outside 
of IT overwhelmingly target critical business 
areas that are fundamental to success in a 
company’s specific industry (e.g., marketing in the 
consumer industry; operations in energy, resources and 
industrial; cybersecurity in financial services). 
For example, in the life sciences and health care industry, 
where R&D is strategically important, the associate 
director of artificial intelligence at a leading health care 
products company said: “Value creation is measured 
operationally by the acceleration of development 
timelines, with AI providing faster results while staying 
within set performance and output quality constraints. 
Our focus is on development speed, rather than 
outperforming human capabilities. And while a tenfold 
acceleration without human involvement remains 
aspirational, a three- to five-fold increase in speed has 
already been realized.”
This is a crucial insight since many business leaders still 
associate GenAI with personal productivity and other 
relatively mundane tasks secondary to the core business. 
“Our company has an enterprisewide AI leadership 
team, but I think they’re really focused on a co-pilot 
strategy and helping all individuals use AI tools to improve 
their productivity,” said the director of organizational 
transformation and change at a leading consumer 
products company. “We’re a little bit behind the eight 
ball on internal processes, and AI is sort of on the fringe. 
I don’t think business-facing case studies have been 
weaved into an overall enterprise AI strategy.”
Now: Where we are
Top three most advanced (scaled) GenAI initiatives by industry
Color of the bubble represents the function
Tech, media & telecom
Government
IT 96%
Operations 3%
IT 34%
Product dev 17%
Cybersecurity 12%
IT 23%
R&D 21%
Operations 11%
IT 21%
Cybersecurity 14%
Finance 13%
Operations 23%
IT 17%
Strategy 11%
IT 20%
Marketing 20%
Customer service 12%
Figure 5b
Q: Consider one of your organization’s most advanced (scaled) GenAI initiatives. In which function or department is this initiative?
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise Survey, (July/Sept. 2024) N (Total) = 2,773
Industry
Top 3 functions 
using GenAI 
applications and 
the percentage of 
initiatives in each
Consumer
Energy, resources & industrial
Financial services
Life sciences & health care
21

<<<P22>>>
Are advanced GenAI initiatives meeting ROI expectations?
Return on investment for organizations’ most advanced GenAI initiatives has been 
generally positive. Almost all organizations report measurable ROI, and one-fifth 
(20%) report ROI in excess of 30%. Similarly, nearly three-quarters (74%) say their 
most advanced initiative is meeting or exceeding their ROI expectations (43% 
meeting, 31% exceeding). Also, two-thirds (67%) say their most advanced initiative is 
at least moderately integrated into their broader work processes (figure 6).
Figure 6
Most advanced (scaled) GenAI initiatives
Now: Where we are
51% or more 
31% to 50% 
11% to 30% 
6% to 10% 
Less than 5% 
Not measuring 
ROI to date
  6%
  14%
  23%
  41%
  9%
 5%
Significantly above
Somewhat above
Meeting
Somewhat below
Significantly below
ROI expectations
  7%
  24%
  19%
  43%
  5%
Completely integrated
Large extent
Moderate extent
Small extent
Not at all, but intend to
No intention to integrate
Level of integration
  4%
  20%
  25%
  43%
  7%
  2%
Q: ROI to date: Estimate the ROI to date for this specific initiative. / ROI expectations: How is the ROI from this Generative AI initiative meeting your organization’s expectations? / Level of integration: To what level is the Generative AI initiative integrated 
into the broader organization’s work process?
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise Survey, (July/Sept. 2024) N (Total) = 2,773
74%
of respondents say their most advanced 
Generative AI initiative is meeting or 
exceeding their ROI expectations.
5
22

<<<P23>>>
Relative to other types of advanced GenAI initiatives, those focused on cybersecurity 
are far more likely to be exceeding their ROI expectations, with 44% of cybersecurity 
initiatives delivering an ROI somewhat or significantly above expectations versus 
only 17% that are delivering an ROI somewhat or significantly below expectations (a 
27-point gap) (figure 7). On the other hand, with advanced GenAI implementations 
in functions such as sales, finance and R&D, more respondents reported ROI below 
expectations than reported ROI above expectations. This suggests some challenges 
have yet to be overcome in those areas.
Meanwhile, 36% of respondents said their cybersecurity initiative is integrated into 
work processes to a large extent—a higher level of integration than any other kind 
of advanced GenAI initiative. These results are somewhat skewed by advanced 
GenAI deployments in the financial services and technology industries, where 
cybersecurity is especially critical. However, the relatively strong performance of 
cyber-related GenAI initiatives makes sense for a number of other reasons as well.1 
Many organizations are already experienced in using AI to manage cyberthreats and 
have related infrastructure in place to scale cyber capabilities. According to Deloitte’s 
Global Future of Cyber Survey, fourth edition, 86% of the organizations surveyed 
already deploy AI-based tools to continuously monitor their digital infrastructure  
to a moderate or large extent.2
Now: Where we are
45%
40%
35%
30%
25%
20%
15%
10%
20%          25%          30%          35%          40%          45%          50%
Below ROI expectations
(% saying somewhat and significantly below)
Above ROI expectations
(% saying somewhat and significantly above)
Q: How is the ROI from this Generative 
AI initiative meeting your organization’s 
expectations?
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise Survey, 
(July/Sept. 2024) N (Total) = 2,773
Figure 7
ROI performance against expectations  
(for most advanced initiatives)
R&D -5
Operations 0
Sales -8
Finance -8
More below 
than above
More above 
than below
Product dev 0
Marketing +2
Strategy +10
Customer service +8
Supply chain +7
IT +15
Cybersecurity  
+27
Those focused on cybersecurity are far more 
likely to be exceeding their ROI expectations.
Meeting expectations
Significantly above expectations
Below expectations
Above expectations
The numbers with each function indicate  
the difference between the % above 
expectations and the % below expectations.
23

<<<P24>>>
 
Next: Looking ahead
24
24

<<<P25>>>
In our final survey of the year, we wanted to explore how organizations expect GenAI adoption and value creation 
to unfold over the next 12–18 months. What do they think could slow adoption? How long do they expect it will take 
to overcome their GenAI-related challenges, and are they willing to sustain their commitment long enough for their 
investments to pay off? Also, what emerging GenAI technologies are they most interested in? 
What could slow GenAI adoption?
According to our respondents, there are a range of issues with the greatest potential to slow overall marketplace 
adoption of GenAI over the next two years. The top potential barriers to adoption include: mistakes / errors with 
real-world consequences (35%); not achieving expected value (34%); shortage of high-quality data (30%); and general 
loss of trust due to bias, hallucinations and inaccuracies (29%) (figure 8).
For broader GenAI adoption to occur, the technology’s reliability, accuracy and trustworthiness will need to improve. 
Also, GenAI initiatives will need to deliver their expected value in a timely manner.
Next: Looking ahead
Q: Which of the following do you think could MOST slow adoption 
of GenerativeAI models/tools/applications by organizations over 
the next two years? (Select two) 
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise Survey, (July/Sept. 2024)  
N (Total) = 2,773
Figure 8
Impediments to GenAI adoption  
in the near future
35%
Mistakes / 
errors leading 
to real-world 
consequences
Not achieving 
expected value
The availability 
of enough high-
quality data
A general loss of 
trust due to bias, 
hallucinations and 
inaccuracies
Intellectual 
property issues
34%
30%
29%
25%
Concerns over 
energy usage /
environmental 
concerns
Rising cost of 
building and 
operating models /
tools / applications
20%
13%
AI sovereignty 
issues
12%
35%
of organizations we surveyed said their top potential barrier to adopting  
Generative AI is mistakes / errors with real-world consequences.
25

<<<P26>>>
As noted above, “not achieving expected value” is in a virtual tie as the No. 1 potential barrier 
to overall adoption of GenAI. Yet, the majority of respondents (55%–70%, depending on the 
challenge) believe their organizations will need at least 12 months to resolve adoption challenges 
such as governance, training, talent, building trust and addressing data issues (figure 9).
According to the head of finance for private assets investments and strategic ventures at a 
leading financial services company, “To create value from our GenAI use case, we will need to 
fundamentally transform our operating cost model by reducing fees and demonstrating that 
one portfolio manager can manage multiple portfolios efficiently over time. This will take at 
least five years to validate and substantiate the KPIs fully.”
Will organizations have the patience and sustained commitment  
to work through their GenAI challenges, or will they cut and run 
before their investments have a chance to pay off? 
In our latest survey, 70% of respondents said their organizations will need at least 12 months 
to resolve the challenges related to surpassing or achieving their expected ROI from GenAI. 
However, 76% reported their organizations will wait at least 12 months before reducing 
investment in a GenAI initiative that is not meeting its value targets. Based on these two 
responses, it appears organizations will likely have the patience necessary to see their GenAI 
investments pay off. 
How long will it take to resolve challenges 
related to GenAI, and are organizations willing 
to wait?
Time to resolve GenAI challenges
Less than 1 year
1 to 2 years
Figure 9
Q: With respect to your organization’s priority Generative AI initiatives, when do you think the 
organization will adequately resolve challenges around the following areas? 
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise Survey, (July/Sept. 2024) N (Total) = 2,773
More than 2 years
Implementing 
a governance 
strategy
29%
52%
17%
Achieving ROI
26%
55%
15%
Acquiring talent
37%
51%
9%
39%
49%
9%
Addressing  
data challenges
40%
51%
Overcoming  
scaling barriers
42%
48%
Training workers
44%
48%
Next: Looking ahead
8%
8%
7%
Managing trust 
issues
26

<<<P27>>>
Among all the emerging GenAI-related technological 
innovations, agentic AI currently appears to be capturing  
the most interest and attention.  
 
 
In fact, according to our survey, the two most interesting areas today are agentic AI 
(52%) and multiagent systems (45%), which is essentially a more advanced, complex 
variant of agentic AI. Closely behind those two is multimodal capabilities, which is 
also an integral part of agentic AI systems (figure 10).
Interest in future GenAI-related developments
Figure 10
Q: What Generative AI technology developments is your organization most interested in? (Select all) 
State of Generative AI in the Enterprise Survey, (July/Sept. 2024) N (Total) = 2,773
52%
GenAI for automation 
(agentic AI)
45%
Multiagent 
systems
Synthetic data for 
training / tuning
Large action 
models
Advanced hardware 
specifically for GenAI 
applications
44%
Multimodal 
capabilities
New training 
techniques
35%
Smaller, less 
resource-intensive 
models
35%
30%
Alternative /
improved 
architectures
28%
21%
Next: Looking ahead
Which technology advances could drive the future of GenAI?
20%
27

<<<P28>>>
AI agents are software systems that can complete complex tasks and meet objectives 
with little or no human intervention. They are called “agents” because they have the  
agency to act independently, planning and executing actions to achieve a specified goal.3 
The vision for agentic AI is that autonomous AI agents will be able to execute assigned 
tasks consistently and reliably by acquiring and processing multimodal data, using various 
tools to complete tasks, and coordinating with other AI agents—all while remembering 
what they’ve done in the past and learning from their experience. 
“In the next phase of GenAI, we envision the development of specialized AI agents 
tailored to specific functions, like sales research, to manage the overwhelming volume 
of data,” said the director of product management for GenAI, cloud and data centers at 
a leading high-tech manufacturing company. “These agents will streamline processes, 
helping sales teams gather critical information quickly—without the need for extensive 
manual research. Multiagent workflows are a future possibility; however, we anticipate 
starting with single-agent solutions that can mature and scale efficiently, focusing on ROI 
as they evolve into production.”
Agentic AI is the next logical step for GenAI, giving GenAI-based 
systems access to more types of information and increasing AI’s  
level of responsibility and autonomy. 
In fact, 26% of our survey respondents said their organizations were already exploring 
autonomous agent development to a large or very large extent. However, as with 
current GenAI systems, agentic AI is not a silver bullet for everything a company needs 
to get done. The key barriers currently facing GenAI—such as regulatory uncertainty, 
inadequate risk management, data deficiencies, and workforce / talent issues—still apply 
and are arguably even more important and challenging due to the increased complexity 
of agentic AI systems.
Next: Looking ahead
“In the next phase of GenAI, we envision the development of specialized AI agents tailored to 
specific functions, like sales research, to manage the overwhelming volume of data.”
— Director of product management for GenAI, cloud and data centers at a leading high-tech manufacturing company
28

<<<P29>>>
 
Considerations
29
29

<<<P30>>>
Initially, senior executives acted as catalysts and drivers for GenAI adoption 
in their organizations. However, with strategies set, funding approved and 
guidance given, many are now expecting GenAI to deliver significant and timely 
improvements in efficiency, productivity, innovation and competitive advantage. 
As such, C-suite leaders (CxOs) today should think about how to redefine their 
roles around GenAI—and how to best lead their organizations forward. 
There are three main ways CxOs can aid in this preparation. First, they must 
ensure the organization stays aligned. Technical and business executives 
should be involved in each other’s conversations and decisions, making 
sure GenAI is appropriately represented. Second, CxOs must manage 
organizational expectations. Leaders at the most senior level tend to be 
more optimistic than those below them when it comes to the organization’s 
rate of progress with GenAI (and ability to overcome obstacles). The GenAI 
journey is long, and C-suite leaders need to be realistic about time horizons 
for project success and organizational transformation. Third, CxOs must 
show patience in the face of uncertainty—providing a steady hand and 
sustained commitment to achieving long-term transformation across 
multiple business areas. 
 
Task the C-suite with creating alignment 
and managing expectations  
Next: Considerations
30

<<<P31>>>
GenAI initiatives are already delivering significant enterprise value, including improved 
efficiency, relationships and innovation. However, our survey results show that measurable 
ROI varies widely for different use cases and functions. Some initiatives are already 
exceeding expectations, but others are currently falling short. The bridge to sustained ROI 
can only be built by establishing the right holistic strategies, building platform capabilities, 
being realistic about targets and timelines, and taking some risks. 
In our case studies, we found that focusing on a small number of high-impact use cases in 
proven areas can accelerate ROI, as can layering GenAI on top of existing processes. Additionally, 
centralized governance can pave the way for smoother adoption and employee buy-in, which 
tends to yield better results and improves scalability. Finally, continuous iteration based on user 
feedback and real-world performance can help ensure sustained value creation. 
Ultimately, organizations need to move beyond isolated initiatives and integrate GenAI  
into increasingly sophisticated and interconnected processes, evolving toward cognitive 
systems with advanced reasoning capabilities. The goal should be to fundamentally  
reinvent business processes.
Build bridges to sustained ROI
Prioritize your workforce and prepare it for disruption
According to our survey results, the number of organizations that feel prepared for GenAI 
from a talent perspective is still quite low and hasn’t changed much since the beginning of 
2024. Also, workforce access to GenAI tools is still somewhat limited and daily use remains 
low. These results all shine a spotlight on the need for organizations to do more to prepare 
their workers for potential disruption from GenAI. 
Although organizations have many priorities and barriers to focus on, they can’t overlook 
talent issues if they want to achieve sustained growth and maximize ROI. Workers need 
more GenAI access and experience—and they need it sooner rather than later. 
Several of our case studies revealed organizational resistance to adopting GenAI solutions, 
which slowed project timelines. Usually, the resistance stemmed from unfamiliarity with 
the technologies and/or skill and technical gaps. Effective change management, including 
education and training, was pivotal in overcoming the challenge. Without adequate 
workforce buy-in and training, even the most powerful GenAI solutions can fail to deliver the 
expected outcomes. Also, developing systems for continuous improvement is critical—with 
users providing ongoing feedback on the quality and accuracy of GenAI solution outputs.
Next: Considerations
31

<<<P32>>>
With agentic AI, the question is not if, but when. Although the technology is still in its early 
stages, it is evolving rapidly and will likely become increasingly capable over the next few 
years. And while there are still many challenges to overcome—and technical complexities 
to sort out—now is the time to start preparing.4  Organizational knowledge and experience 
gained from GenAI implementations will help with the development and deployment of AI 
agents. Also, the 13 elements of scaling mentioned in our prior GenAI reports will be just as 
applicable to agentic AI.5  
Organizations can begin by developing a strategic road map and assessing which tasks and 
workflows are well-suited for agentic AI. Identify specific goals and desired value. Map out 
the risks associated with autonomous agents and create mitigation plans. Start with low-risk 
use cases that use noncritical data—with human oversight as a backup. These early steps 
can help test and build the data management, cybersecurity and governance capabilities 
necessary for safe agentic AI applications. Once your organization is comfortable, it can then 
progress to applications that use more proprietary data, have access to more tools, and 
operate more autonomously.
Start planning for GenAI agents  
Manage an uncertain future
GenAI’s present is filled with great promise, but its future holds many uncertainties. Will 
investments pay off in the long term? Will bias, hallucinations, misinformation and “AI-
generated pollution” be controlled? Will GenAI use cases lead to new business models and 
breakthrough innovations or just optimize existing operations? How fast will GenAI achieve 
broad, human-level performance—if ever? 
Although no one can answer these questions, one thing we know for sure is that all the 
uncertainty surrounding GenAI is hindering its progress. 
To act confidently and decisively in the face of this uncertainty, organizations should consider 
boosting their efforts and capabilities in the areas of foresight, market sensing and scenario 
planning.6 This will help leaders model plausible futures, identify potential blind spots in their 
strategies, and make more informed decisions today.
The widespread transformation being driven by GenAI is truly an odyssey that will take place 
over many years and have many phases. Building the right capabilities today will help your 
organization make more informed strategic choices and position itself to capitalize on future 
developments and opportunities.
Next: Considerations
32

<<<P33>>>
 
Case studies
33
33

<<<P34>>>
GenAI is boosting software security  
in banking 		 	 	
In banking, robust cybersecurity and data governance are essential 
to protect sensitive customer data, comply with complex regulatory 
frameworks, and maintain public trust. 
Case study 1:
Return to page 8
34

<<<P35>>>
We met with the global head of GenAI, cloud and data privacy at a leading bank to explore 
how GenAI is transforming secure software development in financial services. By analyzing 
application vulnerability alerts and reducing false positives, GenAI enables engineers to focus 
on critical issues, limit the number of actionable alerts and enhance operational efficiency.
Problem 
On a typical day, the bank’s security team faces millions of alerts related to code-level 
security issues, such as endpoint vulnerabilities and misconfigurations. Managing this 
volume of alerts is both time intensive and yields false positives, leading to tension with 
the application developers whose performance incentives are aligned with new feature 
development rather than vulnerability remediation. “Previously, developers got frustrated 
because 80% of their time was spent remediating vulnerabilities. Their performance is 
measured by how many new features they deliver, not how many vulnerabilities they fix in 
their code,” said the leader we interviewed.  
Solution 
The bank’s solution aimed to improve the way software is securely developed with GenAI. 
The leader explained that the solution was built on a mature AI foundation within the 
bank. The team deployed “an AI-powered platform, which translates regulations, policies 
and standards … into security controls (including preventative controls, detective controls, 
responsive controls and corrective controls), and then codifies those controls across the 
software development life cycle.”   
From there, facing a daily deluge of potential application security alerts, the bank needed an 
efficient yet accurate way to identify critical vulnerabilities. To address this need, the bank’s 
security operations center implemented a GenAI solution to streamline its vulnerability 
management processes and systems. 
Case study 1: GenAI is boosting software security in banking
35

<<<P36>>>
Approach 
The solution triages millions of incoming cyberthreat alerts, paring them down to thousands 
of “real threats” that then go to different cyber teams—for example, distributed denial-
of-service, malware and others. To enable that prioritization, different security control 
requirements are assessed to score and reduce those alerts down to the most critical 
threats based on breachability (the size of the risk) and exploitability (the likelihood of 
exploitation by a threat actor).  
Additionally, as GenAI is increasingly used to translate regulatory requirements, controls 
can become more automated. For example, GenAI can summarize requirements such as 
the need to rotate encryption keys at set intervals and identify opportunities to automate 
the bank’s security protocols, or it can be used as an intelligence-gathering tool to identify 
common security risks that should be automated. 
For example, “Say an employee’s login credentials aren’t used for more than 30 days; AI can 
detect that and disable the account,” said the leader. “This reduces cybersecurity risk by 
reducing the attack surface.”
Results 
When asked how to think about ROI for this type of solution, the bank leader explained, “We 
calculate the cost for the potential risk against the cost of remediating this risk.” For security, 
the risk economic model covers domains positively impacted / measured by the bank’s 
data-driven, risk-based, decision-making process. These domains include data protection, 
encryption, address in transit, in use, network segmentation, authentication, authorization, 
logging and monitoring.  
The solution has dramatically reduced the number of common application security 
vulnerability alerts the cyber team must triage and development teams must address—
down to fewer than 10 critical vulnerabilities a day. 
Overall, the GenAI solution has significantly reduced the bank’s cyber risk by enabling 
its security and development teams to focus their time and effort on problems that are 
real, impactful and actionable. It has also boosted morale and productivity across the 
engineering team by reducing the time spent on DevSecOps so they can focus more time 
on what they’re economically incentivized to do—develop new software and push critical 
updates into production.  
Case study 1: GenAI is boosting software security in banking
36

<<<P37>>>
GenAI is accelerating sales success  
in tech 		 	 	
Tech companies are players on both sides of the Generative AI market, 
developing GenAI-based products and services they can sell to external 
customers while also harnessing the power of GenAI to help their own 
workers and enhance their own business processes.
Case study 2:
Return to page 8
37

<<<P38>>>
We spoke with the head of Generative AI product management at a large tech company 
to learn how his group is using GenAI. He described how the company uses a centralized 
process to collect all internal GenAI use cases from various business units, and then 
prioritizes them based on importance and feasibility. Use cases are categorized into 
three types: (1) external-facing tools such as chatbots and “agentic solutions” aimed at 
improving customer service; (2) internal developer tools or “co-pilots” designed to enhance 
productivity; and (3) playgrounds driven by application programming interfaces (APIs) that 
allow developers—including technical and business users—to build custom applications 
for specific needs not covered by the other two categories. By employing a structured, 
centralized approach, the company aligns GenAI projects with core business goals,  
ensuring high relevance and strategic impact across multiple functions.
One compelling example from the API playground category is the firm’s accelerated sales 
application, enabled by GenAI. The solution aims to make the company’s sales teams more 
efficient and effective—and help them close deals faster—with an eye toward eventually 
selling those same capabilities as an external product.
Problem 
When it comes to selling big tech, time is money. Sales reps need to use their time wisely so 
they can pursue more deals and build stronger relationships with clients. Although they have 
access to detailed playbooks and other materials designed to help them sell more effectively, 
sales reps struggle with inconsistent processes and dispersed resources, making it 
challenging to efficiently access the available information. What’s more, sales and marketing 
leaders have different intake points across different business units, which makes for a highly 
variable process. 
Sales reps also must be very timely when responding to a new opportunity, especially a “tight 
deadline” request for proposal (RFP). “External customers often need to spend their budgets 
quickly, otherwise the budget will be gone,” said the executive we interviewed. “In many 
cases, the window to respond to an RFP is just three or four business days.”  
Solution 
The company’s new GenAI-powered sales tools have two major components. One is an RFP 
response tool that allows sales reps to summarize customer requirements and expedite 
the creation of responses to RFPs, allowing business leaders to more quickly generate a 
complete and customized proposal with just a few mouse clicks. 
The other is an interactive chatbot with access to the company’s internal knowledge base of 
playbooks and other sales materials. The solution helps business leaders quickly summarize 
information to better prepare for pitches. “Using the tool is very similar to other chatbot 
experiences, but it’s more within our internal domain,” the executive said. “Imagine I’m a 
sales rep and tell the chatbot, ‘I want to sell X, Y, Z. What is the playbook?’ And the system 
responds by giving me some customized bullet points I can rehearse with myself before I 
have to pitch to the client.”
Case study 2: GenAI is accelerating sales success in tech
38

<<<P39>>>
Approach 
The overall strategy originated from the CEO’s dual GenAI agenda of improving internal 
productivity and identifying external commercialization opportunities. This approach 
included guidance to develop an internal platform that, if proven, could potentially be offered 
in the marketplace to external clients facing similar challenges. 
The company used a “sandbox” approach when developing the new sales tools. This gave 
interested sales reps access to GenAI tools and APIs in a safe, low-cost environment so 
they could experiment freely and develop new applications without writing computer code. 
The solution aims to detect common customer pain points and then use those insights to 
generate sales activity by identifying opportunities for commercialization or optimization.
Results 
The GenAI tools seek to enhance deal closure speed and size and improve the accuracy of 
proposal generation—with the ultimate goal of increasing sales performance by leveraging 
internal knowledge resources more effectively.
Currently, the company is more focused on feasibility than monetary returns, using key 
performance indicators (KPIs) related to efficiency and time savings. How many sales reps 
are using the tool, and how long is the period between their first access and generating their 
first output? If the period is short, it’s a sign the tool is both appealing and easy to use. The 
earliest measure of success is onboarding.
Of course, the most important measure of success for a sales tool is its impact on sales. 
In conducting direct A/B comparisons between sales processes that used the new GenAI-
powered tools and those that didn’t, the company found a marked improvement in how 
quickly deals got closed when the tools were used. 
Although the tools are not yet ready to be offered as external products, doing so remains a 
top priority. According to the executive we interviewed, “[Our company’s] CEO would really 
like us to first adopt this Generative AI platform internally and then try to think about any 
way we can sell it to external customers.”
What does long-term success look like for its GenAI sales tool? The hope is for increased deal 
sizes, faster deal closings, and effective deployment of a commercialized external solution.
Case study 2: GenAI is accelerating sales success in tech
39

<<<P40>>>
GenAI is powering an always-on, 
multimodal social media presence in 
the consumer industry	 	 	 	 	
Social media is an increasingly important marketing channel for all 
consumer companies, allowing them to convey the voice of their brand 
and reach customers in a highly compelling way.  
Case study 3:
Return to page 8
40

<<<P41>>>
We spoke with the senior director, head of data and analytics for a leading global consumer 
company to learn how his team is activating a GenAI strategy to help the company’s brands fully 
automate and expand the scope of their real-time social media trend analysis and content creation.
Problem 
Social media marketing is a critical business activity that is costly, time-consuming and subject 
to human bias. In a recent year, social media strategy and content generation cost the company 
US$500M, with much of that spent on third-party contracts with media and creative agencies. 
Solution 
The company is now using GenAI to produce and manage much of its brand-focused social 
media content, including copywriting and creative design previously performed by humans. 
The GenAI-powered solution goes beyond replicating tasks typically handled by third-
party agencies and marketing personnel—expanding creative, targeted and personalized 
marketing in ways that are faster, cheaper and more thorough.  
“A recent example is the Emmys. Our brands were posting content about the event and 
related viral moments,” the consumer executive said. “This content was created entirely by 
GenAI models, picking up some of the trending hashtags, viral clips and news moments, 
then generating a post when it fit with the brand.”
He continued, “Of course, we have strong moderation because we’re putting content out 
to the public web. We have a human in the loop who monitors content, as well as systems 
that use reinforcement learning from human feedback.” This highlights that—despite GenAI’s 
impressive capabilities and performance—human engagement is still considered essential  
to ensure content aligns with brand standards.
Case study 3: GenAI is powering an always-on, multimodal social media presence in the consumer industry
41

<<<P42>>>
Approach 
The company built on its already strong data and AI foundation, which included years of 
experience working with GenAI-related technologies such as natural language processing, 
cognitive intelligence and multistep reasoning. Over the past 18 months, it has deeply 
integrated LLMs and foundation models into its business, focusing on architecture, 
governance and use case development—balancing build versus buy strategies to maximize 
impact and value.
The company’s GenAI strategy has been to rapidly expand and prototype. “In 2023, we were 
throwing a lot at the wall and seeing what stuck: lots of different providers, architectures, 
models and experimentation types,” the executive said. “But in 2024, a lot of that coalesced 
into a strategy we’ve now codified and defined.”
“In this case, our [proof of concept] took the shape of a pre-GenAI solution we already 
had that specifically looked at a social media platform [analyzing trending influencers and 
brand affinity]. Building on that existing dataset, we focused our initial effort on collecting, 
cleansing, organizing and structuring the data in real time. We then took the data and threw 
an LLM on top of it to see what kinds of text content it could generate. Later, we expanded 
our scope to include hashtags, then a multimodal model that includes images, and now 
short-form video.”
Results 
In the United States, around 60% of the company’s brands are using the GenAI-powered 
solution to achieve an always-on social media presence and produce relevant content with 
minimal human involvement. The solution is delivering tangible benefits in three key areas. 
First and foremost is increased productivity, which directly translates into substantial cost 
savings. “Whether it’s a first party, second or third party, there were individuals who were 
conducting these tasks, and there is a dollar value directly associated with each hour of their 
time,” the executive said. 
Second is increased sales, with the GenAI solution helping to boost both the incremental 
number of impressions for each social media post and the monetary value created by those 
impressions (due to heightened awareness, increased purchase conviction, and an easier 
path to purchase). 
The third is reduced media costs, particularly the cost savings that accrue when an effective 
unpromoted social media post eliminates the need to pay for a promoted post—freeing up 
budget that can be invested more strategically elsewhere.
Although many of these benefits have had an immediate impact on the company’s bottom 
line, some of the productivity gains will take longer to fully realize because they require 
formal process changes or revisions to existing annual or multiyear contracts.
Case study 3: GenAI is powering an always-on, multimodal social media presence in the consumer industry
42

<<<P43>>>
Authorship and Acknowledgments
Acknowledgments 
The authors would like to thank our project sponsors and leaders Nitin Mittal, Kevin Westcott and Jeff Loucks, as well as the additional Deloitte subject matter specialists who contributed to the 
development of the survey and report: Bjoern Bringmann, Lou DiLorenzo, Rohan Gupta, Kellie Nuttal, Baris Sarer, Ajay Tripathi and Ashish Verma.
We would also like to thank our team of professionals who brought this report and campaign to life, including: Ahmed Alibage, Siri Anderson, Hali Austin, Saurabh Bansode, Natasha Buckley,  
Vanessa Carney, Dystnct Media, Tracy Fulham, Jordan Garrick, Gerson Lehrman Group (GLG), Karen Hogger, Susie Husted, Lisa Iliff, Wendy Jenkins, Justin Joyner, Diana Kearns-Manolatos, Lena La,  
Amy Lando, Michael Lim, Cullen Marriott, Rajesh Medisetti, Adriana Mendez, Judy Freeman Mills, Melissa Neumann, Inal Olmez, Jamie Palmeroni, Jonathan Pryce, Negina Rood, Emily Rosenberg,  
Kate Schmidt, Meredith Schoen, Michael Steinhart, Kelcey Strong, 10 EQS, Sandeep Vellanki, Ivana Vucenovic, Talia Wertico, Micah Whitson, Marianne Wilkinson and Sourabh Yaduvanshi.
Brenna Sniderman 
Executive Director 
Deloitte Center for Integrated Research 
Deloitte Services LP 
bsniderman@deloitte.com
Jim Rowan 
Applied AI SGO Leader 
Deloitte Consulting LLP 
jimrowan@deloitte.com
Costi Perricos 
Deloitte Global GenAI Business Leader 
Deloitte LLP 
cperricos@deloitte.co.uk
Beena Ammanath  
Executive Director 
Global Deloitte AI Institute  
Deloitte LLP 
bammanath@deloitte.com
Business leadership
Research leadership
David Jarvis 
Senior Research Leader 
Deloitte Center for Technology,  
Media & Telecommunications 
Deloitte Services LP 
davjarvis@deloitte.com
43

<<<P44>>>
About the Deloitte AI Institute 
The Deloitte AI Institute™ helps organizations connect all the different dimensions of the robust, highly dynamic and rapidly evolving AI ecosystem. The AI 
Institute leads conversations on applied AI innovation across industries, using cutting-edge insights to promote human-machine collaboration in the Age  
of With™.
The Deloitte AI Institute aims to promote dialogue about and development of artificial intelligence, stimulate innovation, and examine challenges to AI 
implementation and ways to address them. The AI Institute collaborates with an ecosystem composed of academic research groups, startups, entrepreneurs, 
innovators, mature AI product leaders and AI visionaries to explore key areas of artificial intelligence including risks, policies, ethics, future of work and talent, 
and applied AI use cases. Combined with Deloitte’s deep knowledge and experience in artificial intelligence applications, the institute helps make sense of this 
complex ecosystem and, as a result, delivers impactful perspectives to help organizations succeed by making informed AI decisions.
About the Deloitte Center for Integrated Research
The Deloitte Center for Integrated Research (CIR) offers rigorously researched and data-driven perspectives on critical issues affecting businesses today. We sit  
at the center of Deloitte’s industry and functional expertise, combining the leading insights from across our firm to help leaders confidently compete in today’s 
ever-changing marketplace. 
About the Deloitte Center for Technology, Media & Telecommunications
The Deloitte Center for Technology, Media & Telecommunications (TMT Center) is a world-class research organization that serves Deloitte’s TMT practice and 
our clients. Our team of professional researchers produce practical foresight, fresh insights, and trustworthy data to help clients see clearly, act decisively and 
compete with confidence. We create original research using a combination of rigorous methodologies and deep TMT industry knowledge. 
Learn more
Learn more
Learn more
44

<<<P45>>>
To obtain a global view of how Generative AI is being adopted by organizations on the 
leading edge of AI, Deloitte surveyed 2,773 leaders between July and September 2024.
Respondents were senior leaders in their organizations and included board and 
C-suite members, and those at the president, vice president and director levels. The 
survey sample was split equally between IT and line of business leaders. Fourteen 
countries were represented: Australia (100 respondents), Brazil (115 respondents), 
Canada (175 respondents), France (130 respondents), Germany (150 respondents), 
India (200 respondents), Italy (75 respondents), Japan (100 respondents), Mexico (100 
respondents), the Netherlands (50 respondents), Singapore (75 respondents), Spain 
(100 respondents), the United Kingdom (200 respondents), and the United States 
(1,203 respondents).
All participating organizations have one or more working implementations of AI 
being used daily. Plus, they have pilots in place to explore Generative AI or have one 
or more working implementations of Generative AI being used daily. Respondents 
were required to meet one of the following criteria with respect to their organization’s 
AI and data science strategy, investments, implementation approach and value 
measurement: influence decision-making, are part of a team that makes decisions, are 
the final decision-maker, or manage or oversee AI technology implementations.
All statistics noted in this report and its graphics are derived from Deloitte’s fourth 
quarterly survey, conducted July – September 2024; The State of Generative AI in the 
Enterprise: Now decides next, a report series. N (Total leader survey responses) = 2,773
The survey data was supplemented with case studies and qualitative findings 
derived from 15 interviews with executives and AI and data science leaders at large 
organizations across a range of industries.
Methodology
1.   Duncan Stewart, Karthik Ramachandran and Prashant Raman, “Generative AI and cyber: Big risks, but big 
opportunities too,” Deloitte, November 19, 2024, https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/technology/
technology-media-and-telecom-predictions.html#rising-trends, accessed November 26, 2024.
2.   Emily Mossberg, et al, Global Future of Cyber Survey, 4th edition, Deloitte Global, 2024, pg 23, https://www.deloitte.
com/content/dam/assets-shared/docs/services/risk-advisory/2024/deloitte-global-future-of-cyber-survey-4th-
edition-the-promise-of-cyber.pdf, accessed November 26, 2024.
3.   Jeff Loucks, Gillian Crossan, Baris Sarer and China Widener, “Autonomous generative AI agents: Under 
development,” Deloitte, November 19, 2024, https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/industry/technology/
technology-media-and-telecom-predictions.html#autonomous-generative-ai, accessed November 26, 2024.  
4.   Vivek Kulkarni, Scott Holcomb, Prakul Sharma, Ed Van Buren and Caroline Ritter, “Prompting for action, How AI 
agents are reshaping the future of work,” Deloitte, November 2024, p. 16, https://www2.deloitte.com/content/
dam/Deloitte/us/Documents/consulting/us-ai-institute-generative-ai-agents-multiagent-systems.pdf, accessed 
November 26, 2024.
5.   “Scaling GenAI: 13 Elements for Sustainable Growth and Value,” Deloitte, https://www2.deloitte.com/us/en/pages/
consulting/articles/scaling-generative-ai-strategy-in-the-enterprise.html, accessed November 26, 2024.
6.   Laura Shact, Brad Kreit, Gregory Vert, Jonathan Holdowsky and Natasha Buckley, “Four futures of generative AI 
in the enterprise: Scenario planning for strategic resilience and adaptability,” Deloitte, October 25, 2024, https://
www2.deloitte.com/us/en/insights/topics/digital-transformation/generative-ai-and-the-future-enterprise.html, 
accessed November 26, 2024.
Endnotes
45

<<<P46>>>
About Deloitte
Deloitte refers to one or more of Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited (DTTL), its global network of member firms, and their related entities (collectively, the “Deloitte organization”). DTTL ( also referred to as “Deloitte 
Global”) and each of its member firms and related entities are legally separate and independent entities, which cannot obligate or bind each other in respect of third parties. DTTL and each DTTL member firm and 
related entity is liable only for its own acts and omissions, and not those of each other. DTTL does not provide services to clients. Please see www.deloitte.com/about to learn more.
 
Deloitte provides industry-leading audit and assurance, tax and related services, consulting, financial advisory, and risk advisory services to nearly 90% of the Fortune Global 500® and thousands of private 
companies. Our people deliver measurable and lasting results that help reinforce public trust in capital markets, enable clients to transform and thrive, and lead the way toward a stronger economy, a more equitable 
society, and a sustainable world. Building on its 175-plus year history, Deloitte spans more than 150 countries and territories. Learn how Deloitte’s approximately 457,000 people worldwide make an impact that 
matters at www.deloitte.com.
 
This publication contains general information only and Deloitte is not, by means of this publication, rendering accounting, business, financial, investment, legal, tax, or other professional advice or services. This 
publication is not a substitute for such professional advice or services, nor should it be used as a basis for any decision or action that may affect your business. Before making any decision or taking any action that 
may affect your business, you should consult a qualified professional advisor. Deloitte shall not be responsible for any loss sustained by any person who relies on this publication.
 
Copyright © 2025 Deloitte Development LLC. All rights reserved.
deloitte.com/us/state-of-generative-ai
