Skip to Main Content
An official website of the European Union
How do you know?

This site uses cookies. Visit our cookies policy page or click the link in any footer for more information and to change your preferences.

Accept all cookies
Accept only essential cookies
Log in
English
Search by keyword
Search
Search
Home
Data
News
Publications
About us
Contact us
Help
Home
News
News articles
NEWS ARTICLES 11 December 2025
20% of EU enterprises use AI technologies

In 2025, 20.0% of EU enterprises with 10 or more employees used artificial intelligence (AI) technologies to conduct their business, showing a solid growth of 6.5 percentage points (pp) from 13.5% in 2024. Compared with 2021 (7.7%) and 2023 (8.1%), the use of AI technologies is becoming more popular among EU businesses.

The highest shares of these enterprises in 2025 were in Denmark (42.0%), Finland (37.8%) and Sweden (35.0%). At the other end were Romania (5.2%), Poland (8.4%) and Bulgaria (8.5%).

Almost all EU countries recorded increases in the share of enterprises using AI technologies compared with the previous year. Denmark registered the highest increase (+14.5 pp), followed by Finland (+13.5 pp) and Lithuania (+12.5 pp). 

Click to enlarge

Source dataset: isoc_eb_ai

The most common use of AI technology by EU enterprises was to analyse written language (11.8%). This was followed by AI use to generate pictures, videos, sound/audio (9.5%), written or spoken language (8.8%) and to convert spoken language into machine-readable format (7.2%). 

Compared with 2024, the use of AI technology that grew the most in 2025 was analysing written language (+4.9 pp), followed by the generation of written or spoken language (+3.4%). 

Click to enlarge

Source dataset: isoc_eb_ai

For more information
Statistics Explained article on use of artificial intelligence in enterprises
Thematic section on digital economy and society
Database on digital economy and society
Digitalisation in Europe - 2025 edition
Digitalisation dashboard 
Business sector profiles - visualisation
Methodological notes
Data comes from the 2025 EU survey on ICT usage and e-commerce in enterprises and refers to all enterprises with at least 10 employees or self-employed persons (classified in statistical classification of economic activities in the European Community (NACE) Rev. 2 sections C to J, L to N and group 95.1).
Enterprises using artificial intelligence refer to the following AI technologies: 
technologies performing analysis of written language (text mining)
technologies converting spoken language into machine-readable format (speech recognition)
technologies generating written or spoken language or programming codes (natural language generation, speech synthesis)
technologies generating pictures, videos, sound/audio
technologies identifying objects or persons based on images (image recognition, image processing)
machine learning (e.g. deep learning) for data analysis
technologies automating different workflows or assisting in decision making (Al-based software robotic process automation)
technologies enabling physical movement of machines via autonomous decisions based on observation of surroundings (autonomous robots, self-driving vehicles, autonomous drones)
Machine learning (e.g. deep learning) involves ‘training’ a computer model to better perform an automated task, e.g. pattern recognition.
Natural language processing, natural language generation or speech recognition are the ability for a computer program to understand human language as it is spoken, to convert data into natural language representation or to identify words and phrases in spoken language and convert them to a machine-readable format.
AI technologies used to generate pictures, videos, sound/audio is a new category, not present in the 2024 questionnaire, therefore there is no data for that year. 


For information on upcoming releases visit our release calendar. If you have any queries, please visit our contact us page.
 

Share this page: 
Facebook
X
LinkedIn
E-mail
You might also like
Films, series & sports: top choice for paid subscriptions
27 August 2026
A quarter of EU citizens buy tickets online for events
4 August 2026
75% of young Europeans have at least basic digital skills
15 July 2026
54% of young people encountered hostile messages online
18 June 2026
Rate this page
Select the number of stars that correspond to your rating
5 stars
4 stars
3 stars
2 stars
1 star
Give us more feedback
This site is managed by Eurostat and is an official website of the European Union
Accessibility
Need help?
Sitemap
Contact us
Follow us
X
Facebook
Instagram
LinkedIn
Youtube
RSS
Discover more on europa.eu
Contact the EU
Call us 00 800 6 7 8 9 10 11
Use other telephone options
Write us via our contact form
Meet us at one of the EU centres
Social media
Search for EU social media channels
Legal
Languages on our websites
Privacy policy
Legal notice
Cookies
EU institutions and bodies
Search all EU institutions and bodies