Sign In
About  Newsroom  Careers 
 
Insights
Tools
Expert Guidance
Conferences
Webinars
AI Hub
Talk to Us 

or call +44 (0) 33 3060 4744

Data & Analytics
Overview
Solutions
Priorities
Client Stories
Events
Data Quality: Best Practices for Accurate Insights

Accessible, accurate, usable data is essential if you want your D&A function to produce business results.

Download Research on Building an Effective Data Quality Program

Learn the 12 actions CDAOs can take to improve data quality.

Work Email
Continue

By clicking the "Continue" button, you are agreeing to the Gartner Terms of Use and Privacy Policy.

Develop a balanced approach to data quality improvement

Trusted, high-quality data is key to enabling a data-driven enterprise, yet many D&A and AI initiatives fail because of poor data quality. Generative AI will rapidly transform how technical professionals ensure data quality in their data environments. Download this research to learn:

Use cases
Data quality capabilities
Benefits and impacts of large language models on data quality practices
Improve D&A results and decrease costs with high-quality data

Boost the value from your data and analytics program with a foundation of data quality. Follow these practices to set up an effective data quality program.

Data Quality: What and Why?
 
Scope the Data Quality Program
 
Measuring Data Quality
 
Data Quality Tools
What is data quality and why is it important?

Data quality refers to the usability and applicability of data used for an organization’s priority use cases — including AI and machine learning initiatives. Data quality is usually one of the goals of effective data management and data governance. Yet too often organizations treat it like an afterthought.

Why is data quality important to the organization? In part because poor data quality costs organizations at least $12.9 million a year on average, according to Gartner research from 2020.

A number of common challenges hinder organizations and make it difficult for them to address their data quality issues, such as:

Growing regulatory requirements from government or industry. These include GDPR and CCPA, which restrict how organizations manage personal data and make them accountable for any personal data they hold.
Inconsistency in data across sources. Named as the most challenging data quality problem, according to Gartner, is the result of having data stored and maintained in silos with significant overlaps, gaps or inconsistencies. If they are not connected, data standardization becomes much harder.
Lack of resources. Organizations may have a data quality program in one department or in one data domain but cannot scale it due to a scarcity of skills, experience and resources.
Lack of ownership. While business leaders agree that data quality matters, they do not view it as their responsibility, nor do they necessarily understand how data related to their domain relates to broader enterprise outcomes. Yet data quality is a business discipline. How business users enter data, use data and manage the data are the foundations of data quality. Ownership and collaboration among stakeholders are essential.

The first two issues are related to data itself. The second two are related to data management. Data and analytics leaders can mitigate these challenges by establishing a modern data quality program that has a defined scope, establishes key processes for data quality measurement and leverages modern data quality technology tools.

Attend a Conference

Experience Data and Analytics conferences

With exclusive insights from Gartner analysts on the latest trends, sessions curated for your role and unmatched peer networking, Gartner conferences help you accelerate your priorities.

View Conference Calendar 
21 – 22 Sep 2026

Gartner Data & Analytics Summit

Mumbai, India

Learn More
FAQ on data quality
What is data quality?
How do I measure and improve data quality?
Why is data quality important to an organization?

Drive stronger performance on your mission-critical priorities.

Talk to Us
    
About Gartner
Who We Are
About Us
Corporate Responsibility
Investor Relations
Newsroom
What We Do
Insights
Conferences
Consulting
Get in Touch
Contact
Contact Us
Become a Client
Office Locations
Technical Support
Careers
Why Gartner
Search Careers
Our Culture
Careers Blog
Latest Insights
Resources
Featured Insights
Webinars
Newsletter
Client Stories
POLICIES PRIVACY POLICY TERMS OF USE OMBUDS SITE MAP

©2026 Gartner, Inc. and/or its affiliates. All rights reserved.

We use cookies to improve your experience

We use cookies to deliver the best possible experience on our website. To learn more, visit our Privacy Policy. By continuing to use this site, or closing this box, you consent to our use of cookies. Cookie Notice.
Accept
;